# How to Rotate Keys

Many organizations rotate their keys on a regular schedule for security
reasons. Cloak can do this with **zero downtime**.

## Add Your New Key

You will need to add your new key to your vault configuration, **as the
first key in the `:ciphers` list.** Demote and re-label existing keys.

For example, if your config currently looks like this:

    config :my_app, MyApp.Vault,
      ciphers: [
        default: {Cloak.Ciphers.AES.GCM, tag: "AES.GCM.V1", key: <<...>>},
      ]

Then change the `:default` label to the new key, and demote the existing
key to the `:retired` label.

    config :my_app, MyApp.Vault,
      ciphers: [
        default: {Cloak.Ciphers.AES.GCM, tag: "AES.GCM.V2", key: <<...>>},
        retired: {Cloak.Ciphers.AES.GCM, tag: "AES.GCM.V1", key: <<...>>}
      ]

## Migrate Data To New Key

For each schema that uses your vault, run `mix cloak.migrate`:

    mix cloak.migrate -r MyApp.Repo -s MyApp.Schema

Alternatively, you can migrate multiple schemas at once by configuring
the following values in `config/config.exs`:

    config :my_app,
      cloak_repo: MyApp.Repo,
      cloak_schemas: [...]

With that in place, you can simply run:

    mix cloak.migrate

## Remove Retired Key

Once you are confident that all data have been converted over to use
the new key, you may remove the `:retired` key from your configuration.

    config :my_app, MyApp.Vault,
      ciphers: [
        default: {Cloak.Ciphers.AES.GCM, tag: "AES.GCM.V2", key: <<...>>},
      ]

# How It Works

Every ciphertext generated by Cloak is tagged with the `:tag` of the
configured cipher that produced it. 

As a result, Cloak will be able to find and use the correct cipher to decrypt
any old ciphertext as long as you leave its cipher configured.

When you add a new default key, Cloak will immediately begin encrypting
new data with the new key. Every time existing data are fetched from the
database, they will be decrypted with the old key, and if changed, will
be encrypted with the new key.

Even if you don't run `mix cloak.migrate`, data will gradually be converted
over to the new key as they are used. The migration task simply speeds up
the process.

This allows you to perform key migrations with zero dowtime, with both
the new key and old key active at the same time.